
03 October 1993

    IDL can be run under both VMS on the HEASRC Vax workstation (LHEA Vax
cluster), under Unix on the GOF Sun workstations ROSSERV, ROS9, ROS16,
XTELAB, AND HEASFS, and under Ultrix on the Decstation LEGACY. The
instructions given below will probably change in future, as we are still
setting things up, software is being developed, etc. 


A. Accessing IDL under VMS from HEASRC

     To access IDL from HEASRC, logon normally and then type 

     @idl:[lib.rosat.com]idldef         

This command will set up the directory paths, logical assignments, etc. for
you so that IDL can be run in a way that is transparent for you, the user.

(note: You may find it convenient to add this command to your login.com file.)

Then type 

     idl                                  (gets you into idl)

The system should respond with the following prompt: IDL>


B. Accessing IDL from a Sun workstation at the GSFC GOF

     To access IDL from a Sun workstation, follow these steps: First type

     xinit                                (to start xwindows)

     If you are logged directly onto rosserv, then set up your environmental
variables by typing

     source /usr1/source/idl/lib/com/.idlrc

(note: You may find it convenient to add this command to your .login file.)

Then type

     idl                                  (gets you into idl)

The system should respond with the following prompt: IDL>

     If you are not logged directly onto rosserv, then you will need to add 
rosserv to your xhost list. From the console window, type 

     xhost +rosserv                       (tells the Sun that the xwindows
                                           plots will be generated from rosserv)

(note: if you are in one of the guest accounts, you can also use the mouse
cursor to do the same thing. First activate the console window. Then use
the left cursor button to pull down a menu from anywhere in the blank area
outside the windows, go into the xhosts submenu, and click on the 
"xhost +rosserv" command line.) 

     Now Rlogon to rosserv, and set your environmental variables (unless
you cleverly added the appropriate command to your login file). You will
also need to set the environmental variable DISPLAY to your particular
node. For example, if you are logged onto ros11, then type 

     setenv DISPLAY ros11:0.0  

(note: this command should not be added to your login file, as there is as
yet no way to tell rosserv which node you are using.) 

     In future, we hope to make things more transparent for Unix users, as 
for VMS users.

NOTE:

     You can also run IDL remotely from HEASRC, while logged onto a Sun.
Follow these steps:

     xinit                                (to start xwindows)

Then, in the heasfs window

     xhost heasrc                         (tells the Sun that the xwindows
                                           plots will be generated from heasrc)
     telnet heasrc                        (to connect to heagip)

Logon normally (you will need an account, of course!), then

     @idl:[lib.com]idldef                 (sets up session for IDL with 
                                           XWINDOWS)
     set display/create/node=ros11/transport=tcpip
                                          (tells heagip that you want to send
                                           the XWINDOWS plots to ros11 for
                                           plotting)

(If you are logged onto a different workstation than ros11, then substitute
that workstation name for ros11.) 

Then type

     idl                                  (gets you into idl)

The system should respond with the following prompt: IDL>

CAUTION: Try to use this only during times when HEASRC is not being used,
because it can slow HEASRC down *a lot*. 


C. Getting started in IDL

To get a list of what procedures are available, type

     doc_list,proj='rosat'    

or  

     doc_list,proj='idlaul'

You will then get a list of topics for either Rosat specific procedures, or
for more general procedures in the IDL Astronomical Users' Library (put
together by Wayne Landsman, Bill Thompson, and others in Code 681 at GSFC).
To get a list of procedures useful for a particular topic, type, e.g.,

     doc_list,proj='rosat',topic

where topic is the name of one of the topics, enclosed by single quotes.
For example, typing 

     doc_list,proj='rosat','fits_3d'

will give a list of procedures useful for reading Rosat 3D FITS files.

To get more information on a particular procedure, type

     doc_library,procedure

where procedure is the name of the procedure, enclosed by single quotes.
For example, typing 

     doc_library,'tbread'

will give you details about the procedure tbread.

If you have only forgotten the format of the command line for an IDL procedure,
simply type the name of the procedure with no arguments. The procedure will
respond by typing the command line, using the following convention

     input variables in lower case (in the order expected)
     output variables in upper case
     keywords typed with the = sign (e.g., project=project) at the end
     optional variables enclosed in square brackets

You can also type 

     help,/routines

to see the command syntax for all procedures and functions which have already
been compiled.

To exit IDL, simply type

     exit

or

     ctrl Z

Note that when you exit IDL, all of the dynamic memory associated with your
session will be released. You will lose all variables that you have not
saved (using the IDL SAVE procedure) or otherwise written out to disk. Of
course, any disk files that you have created will not be affected.

